*If you are interested in joining this proposal, please have a look at the Call for Collaborators: https://github.com/pkraker/open-discovery/issues/1*

#Proposal
Discovery is an essential task for every researcher, especially in dynamic research fields such as biomedicine. Currently, there are only a limited number of discovery tools for scientific content that can be used by a mainstream audience; most users rely on search engines. But while search works well for many information needs, it makes for a poor discovery tool. Search engines display very little information at a glance (usually limited to 10 items a page), and they provide little context and structuring. Another problem is that the results of the discovery process are usually not shared; they become visible only later as reference lists or reading lists, but again with very little context. Therefore, the discovery process is repeated over and over again, taking away a lot of time and resources from the actual research.

We propose BLAZE, an open discovery tool that goes far beyond the functionality of seach engines and social reading lists to meet the discovery needs of researchers and students. The proposed tool will enable users to do their discovery in a single interface. The tool will use open content from [Pubmed Central](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/) and other sources to provide topical maps for a given list of open access papers, e.g. a journal volume or the most relevant papers of a search result. The maps are created automatically using the open content to calculate similarities among papers and to derive topical structures. Furthermore, they will be enriched with features that are extracted from the full texts (e.g. all papers with the same species are highlighted). Users can interact with the maps, explore different topical areas, filter and read individual papers in the same interface. Furthermore, users can activate an edit mode to make changes to the maps and to introduce new papers and topical areas. These maps will be openly shared on [openknowledgemaps.org](http://openknowledgemaps.org) where they can be extended by other users. We envision that in this way, users will collaboratively create comprehensive maps of research fields. The history will be preserved to show the individual contributions of users. The maps themselves are open, meaning that users can embed these maps on their own websites and export the structure in various open formats.

The proposed tool will make extensive use of the digital open science ecosystem, including open content, content mining services, open source solutions, and open metrics data. With this tool, we want to show the potential of open science for innovation in scholarly communication and discovery. In addition, we believe that this tool will increase the visibility of and awareness for open content.

BLAZE will be based on the existing open source visualization [Head Start](http://github.com/pkraker/Headstart). Head Start has a JavaScript frontend (built with D3.js) that displays an interactive visualization of a knowledge domain (see http://openknowledgemaps.org for an example). The main areas of the knowledge domain are represented by the blue bubbles. Each area contains a number of relevant papers. The size of the bubbles signifies the relative importance of that area (by number of downloads, clicks, readers etc.). The closer two areas in the visualization, the closer they are subject-wise. The dropdown on the right displays the papers’ metadata in list form.

In terms of the interaction design, the visualization follows Shneiderman’s well-tested approach of “overview first, zoom and filter, then details-on- demand”. Once you click on a bubble, the visualization zooms in and you are presented with the relevant papers in that area. When clicking on a paper, its metadata and abstract are presented in the right-hand pane. The full text can be retrieved by clicking on the thumbnail in the metadata panel. By clicking on the white background, users can zoom out and inspect another area. In addition, a user can filter the publications by entering terms in the search field on top of the list. Only publications that contain all of the search terms are displayed within the bubbles and the list. The list can also be sorted by title, area, and number of readers to facilitate exploration.

The backend of the visualization is written in PHP and R. The preprocessing component is responsible for creating the JSON for the visualization. It connects to open content using the [rOpenSci packages](https://ropensci.org/). Currently, a connector to PLOS is implemented. It then proceeds to calculate similarities between papers using the R tm package. Based on these similarities, the spatial representation and the sub-areas are calculated using ordination and clustering techniques. A naming component finally determines the label for each cluster using keywords. After processing, the representation is saved in a SQLite database. The full stack implementation can be seen on [Open Knowledge Maps](http://openknowledgemaps.org/mozfest). This implementation creates a visualization of the 100 most relevant results of any PLOS search on the fly.

In the first phase of the Open Science Price, we propose to extend the visualization on both the backend and the frontend. On the backend, we will add a number of connectors to open content from PubmedCentral. We will then enrich the open content with facts that have been extracted from the papers by open content mining services such as the [ContentMine](http://contentmine.org). We will also connect to open metrics services, such as [Crossref DET](http://det.labs.crossref.org/) to add further context to the papers.  On the frontend, we will add functionality to highlight contextual facts to the papers and to create additional links between the papers (e.g. highlight all papers that contain the same species). Furthermore, we will implement an edit mode that will enable users to introduce new papers and topical areas, complete with a persistence infrastructure to save the changes and export the created structures in open formats, including Linked Open Data (RDF). This will enable republication of maps on other services.

The concrete targets for developing the innovation are published as Github issues on this repository, which will also be the main point of development. The code will be made available on Github under the license of the current project (LGPL 2.1). The visualizations will be released under CC-BY 4.0 with the exception of the contained content which of course retains its original copyright.

#Implementation
As stated above, we use R in the backend to access open content on the web. We use many software packages produced by rOpenSci, including the ability to search for scholarly content against the following engines (with wide diversity of journals): Crossref (~78 million records), Pubmed (~25 million records), EuroPubmed (~30 million records). In addition, we can query against pre-print services such as arXiv, Biorxiv, and Peerj Preprints. The rOpenSci text mining suite of packages allows retrieval of open access full text content via those search engines listed above. Last, rOpenSci packages allow for search against data repositories such as Figshare, Dryad, DataONE, and more.
